# The Basics

## Declaring Values and Variables

### 1. `val`

A value declared with `val` is **constant**.

```scala
val answer = 8 * 5 + 2
val xmax, ymax = 100 // You can declare multiple values together and you set them the same value.
```

In Scala, you are encouraged to use a `val` unless you really need to change contents. 

### 2. `var`

A variable is declared with `var`.

```scala
var counter = 0
var greeting: String = "hello"
```

Note that you need not to specify the type of a value or variable because it can be inferred from the type of the expression which you initialize it. ==It is an error declare a value or variable without initializing it.==

## Common Uses Types

There is no distinction between primitive types and class types in Scala. Therefore, you can invoke methods on numbers. 

```scala
1.toString()
```

In Scala, use methods instead of cats to convert between numeric types.

```scala
99.44.toInt // you get 99
```

## Arithmetic and Operator Overloading 

All operators are actually methods. `a + b`is a shorthand for `a.+(b)`. Scala allows defining methods with any symbols for names. 

Note Scala doesn't have `++`or`--`operators. Instead, simply use `+=1`or `-=1`. Since the `Int`class is immutable, such a method can not change any integer value. The Scala designers decided it wasn't worth having just another special rule just to save one keyword.

## Calling Methods

### 1. no parentheses

If the method has no parameters, you don't have to use parentheses. 

```scala
"hello".sorted
```

### 2. static methods

Many methods are defined as static methods. You can import the packages and use them.

```scala
import scala.math._ // _ is a wildcard like * in Java
sqrt(2)
```

Or you can just add the package name as a prefix.

```scala
scala.math.sqrt(2)
```

You can omit the `scala`prefix if a package name starts with `scala.`.

### 3. companion object 

Often a class has a companion object whose methods are just like static methods. For example, `BigInt`is a companion object to `scala.math.BigInt`class and has a method `probablePrime`which can generate a random prime with a given number of bits.

## The `apply`Method

```scala
val str = "hello"
str(4) // 'o'
```

You can think of this as an overloaded form of the `()` operator. It is implemented as a method with the name `apply`. That is, `s(4)`is a shorthand for `s.apply(4)`.

## Scaladoc

- Look into `RichInt`, `RichDouble`and so on if you want to know how to work with numeric types. Similarly, to work with strings, look into `StringOps`.
- The mathematical functions are in the package `scala.math`.
- Sometimes, you'll see functions with funny name. 
- Methods can have functions as parameters. 
- You'll occasionally run into classes such as `Range`or`Seq[T]`. In Scala, you use square brackets for type parameters. 
- Some methods have implicit parameters. For example, the `sorted`method of `StringOps`is declared as `def sorted[B >: Char](implicit ord: math.Ordering[B]): String`.

# Control Structures and Functions 

## Conditional Expressions

In Scala, every expression has a type defined by returned values. 

```scala
val s = if (x > 0) -1 else 1
```

If the `else`branch is omitted, it's equivalent to return a `()`:

```scala
if (x > 0) 1 else ()
```

`()`is the *only* value of `Unit`class. Think of `Unit`as as analog of `void`.

## Statement Termination 

- If you want to have more than one statement on a single line, you need to separate them with semicolon.
- If you want to continue a long statement over two lines, make sure that the first line ends in a symbol that cannot be the end of a statement. An operator is often a good choice. 

## Block Expressions and Assignments 

In Scala, a `{}`block contains a sequence of expressions and the result is also an expression. The value of the block is the value of the *last* expression. 

Note that assignments in Scala have a `()`value. 

## String Interpolation

### 1. f

A formatted string is prefixed with the letter `f`. It contains expressions that are prefixed with `$`and optionally C-style format strings. You need `${...}`around expressions that are not variable names.

```scala
f"hello, $name. In six months, you will be ${age + 0.5}%7.2f years old."
```

To include a `$`sign, double it. 

### 2. s

With a prefixed `s`, strings can contain expressions but *not* format directives. 

### 3.  raw

With a prefix `raw`, escape sequences in a string are not evaluated. 

```scala
raw"\n a newline" // escacpe \n
```



 







